          WORLD PROFESSIONAL BILLIARDS
               AND SNOOKER ASSOCIATION
                 WORLD GOVERNING BODY

               OFFICIAL RULES

                        OF THE GAMES OF

SNOOKER AND ENGLISH BILLIARDS
                     APPROVED & PUBLISHED BY:

            The World Professional Billiards & Snooker
                     Association Limited (WPBSA)

                             75 Whiteladies Road
                                       Clifton
                                       Bristol

                                     BS8 2NT
                                      England

                           Tel: +44 (0) 117 3178200
                         e-mail: rules@wpbsa.com

         Official World Rules Revised; September 2024

  Copyright © The World Professional Billiards and Snooker
                         Association Limited 2024

 The World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association
Limited (WPBSA) as the World Governing Body of Snooker

    and English Billiards and in accordance with the rights
  obtained from the Billiards and Snooker Control Council
 in 1992 has asserted its right to be identified as the owner
 and author of this work in accordance with the Copyright,

                     Designs and Patents Act 1988.

    All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
   reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted

     in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
  photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior

                  permission of the copyright owner.
                              PAGE TITLE

   Lt Neville Chamberlain - pictured in Madras 1883
standing third from left, created the Sport of Snooker

                   in Jubbulpore, India in 1875
      The Billiards Association, Established in 1885
     The Billiards Control Club, Established in 1908

                     Amalgamated in 1919 as
       The Billiards Association & Control Council,

                          Established in 1919
     Renamed as The Billiards and Snooker Control

                             Council in 1971
All rights purchased by and transferred to the World
 Professional Billiards & Snooker Association in 1992,

                         Established in 1968
RULES APPLIED GLOBALLY

WORLD PROFESSIONAL BILLIARDS
    AND SNOOKER ASSOCIATION

WORLD SNOOKER TOUR          WORLD SNOOKER
                                FEDERATION

WORLD DISABILITY BILLIARDS  WORLD WOMEN’S SNOOKER
           AND SNOOKER

WORLD BILLIARDS             WORLD SENIORS SNOOKER
01
CONTENTS

CONTENTS                       PAGES
                               4-41
RULES OF THE GAME OF SNOOKER   6
                               42-46
SNOOKER RULES INDEX            48-76
                               50
SNOOKER SHOOTOUT               77-80
COMPETITION RULES

RULES OF THE GAME
OF ENGLISH BILLIARDS

ENGLISH BILLIARDS RULES INDEX

SECTION FOR NOTES

02
03
   RULES OF
THE GAME OF

   SNOOKER

             04
05
SNOOKER RULES INDEX

INDEX                     Page      SNOOKER                    Page
                                    EQUIPMENT
SECTION 1                   7
                            8       3 Cue                      9
1 The Standard Table
2 Balls                     10      4 Ancillary                9
                            10
SECTION 2                   10      DEFINITIONS
                            10
1 Frame                     11      13 Free Ball               13
2 Game                      11
3 Match                     12      14 Forced Off the Table    13
4 Balls                     12
5 Striker and Turn          12      15 Infringements, Fouls and 13
6 Stroke                    13
7 Potting and Pocketing     13      Penalties
8 Break                     13
9 In-hand                           16 Penalty Points          14
10 Ball in Play             16
11 Ball On                  17      17 Snookered               14
12 Nominated Ball           18
                           20       18 Spot Occupied           14
SECTION 3
                            21      19 Push Stroke             14
1 Description               21
2 Position of Balls                 20 Jump Shot               15
3 Mode of Play              21
4 End of Frame,            23       21 Miss                    15
                           24
     Game or Match         24       22 Consultation Period     15
5 Playing from In-hand
6 Hitting Two Balls        36       THE GAME
                           37
     Simultaneously        37       11 Penalty Values          26
7 Spotting Colours         38
8 Touching Ball                     12 Snookered After a Foul 28
9 Ball on Edge of Pocket   40
10 Fouls                    41      13 Play Again              29

SECTION 4                           14 Foul and a Miss         29

1 Unsporting Conduct                15 Ball Moved by Other     31
2 Conceding
3 Time Wasting                      than Striker
4 Penalty
                                    16 Ball Intentionally Moved 32
SECTION 5
                                    17 Stalemate               33
1 The Referee
2 The Marker                        18 Four-handed Snooker     33

                                    19 Six Reds Snooker        34

                                    20 Use of Ancillary Equipment 35

                                    21 Interpretation          35

                                    THE PLAYERS

                                    5 Non-striker              38

                                    6 Scoring Responsibility   39

                                    7 Absence                  39

                                    THE OFFICIALS

                                    3 The Stroke Recorder      41

                                    4 Assistance by Officials  41

                                06
                          SECTION 1 • SNOOKER

SECTION 1 EQUIPMENT

Measurements displayed in brackets state the metric equivalent
to the nearest millimetre.

1. The Standard Table

     (a) The Playing Area
     The playing area is within the cushion faces and shall measure
     11 ft 8½ in x 5 ft 10 in (3569 mm x 1778 mm) with a tolerance
     on both dimensions of +/- ½ in (13 mm).

     (b) Height
     The height of the table from the floor to the top of the
     cushion rail shall be 2 ft 10 in (864 mm) with a tolerance of
     +/- ½ in (13 mm).

     (c) Bottom Cushion and Top Cushion
     The two shorter sides of the table are defined as the Bottom
     (also known as Baulk) and Top Cushions of the table. Where a
     cloth with a nap is fitted to the table, the smooth grain of the
     nap runs from the Bottom Cushion to the Top Cushion.

     (d) Baulk-line and Baulk
     A straight line drawn 29 in (737 mm) from the face of the
     Bottom Cushion, and parallel to it, running from side
     cushion to side cushion is called the Baulk-line. That line and
     the intervening space is termed Baulk.

     (e) The “D”
     The “D” is a semi-circle marked in Baulk with the centre of its
     straight section in the middle of the Baulk-line and with a
     radius of 11½ in (292 mm).

                                           07
                          SECTION 1 • SNOOKER

     (f) Spots
     Marked at each corner of the “D”, viewed from the Baulk end,
     the one on the right is known as the Yellow Spot and the one
     on the left as the Green Spot.
     Four spots are marked on the centre longitudinal line of the
     table:

           (i) one in the middle of the Baulk-line, known as the
                 Brown Spot;

           (ii) one located midway between the points
                 perpendicularly below the faces of the Top and
                 Bottom Cushions, known as the Blue Spot;

           (iii) one located midway between the Blue Spot and a
                 point perpendicularly below the face of the Top
                 Cushion, known as the Pink Spot; and

           (iv) one 12¾ in (324 mm) from a point perpendicularly
                 below the face of the Top Cushion, known as the
                 Black Spot.

     (g) Pocket Openings
     There shall be a pocket at each of the four corners of the
     table and one each at the middle of the longer sides.

2. Balls

     (a) A set of balls comprises of 15 Red balls, and one each of
           the following coloured balls: Yellow, Green, Brown, Blue,
           Pink, Black and a White.

     (b) The balls shall be of an approved composition and shall
           each have a diameter of 52.5 mm with a tolerance of +/-
           0.05 mm.

     (c) The balls shall be of equal weight where possible but the
           tolerance between the heaviest ball and the lightest ball
           in a set should be no more than 3 g.

     (d) A ball or set of balls may be changed by agreement
           between the players or on a decision by the referee.

                                           08
                          SECTION 1 • SNOOKER
3. Cue
A cue shall be not less than 3 ft (914 mm) in length and shall
show no change from the traditional tapered shape and form,
with a tip, used to strike the cue-ball, secured to the thinner end.
4. Ancillary
Various cue rests, long cues, extensions and adaptors may be
used by players. These may form part of the equipment normally
found at the table but also include equipment introduced by
either a player or the referee. All extensions, adaptors and other
devices to aid cueing and/or sighting must have received prior
approval from the relevant governing body.

                                           09
                          SECTION 2 • SNOOKER

SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS

Standard definitions used throughout these Rules are italicised.

1. Frame

A frame of snooker comprises the period of play from the start
(see Section 3 Rule 3(c)), each player playing in turn until the
frame is completed by:

     (a) an accepted concession by any player; or
     (b) a claim by the striker, when Black is the only object

           ball remaining on the table, aggregate points are
           not relevant, and there is a difference of more than
           seven points between the scores in the striker’s
           favour; or
     (c) being awarded to the non-striker, when Black is the
           only object ball remaining on the table, aggregate
           points are not relevant, and there is a difference of
           more than seven points between the scores in the
           non-striker’s favour; or
     (d) the first pot or foul, when Black is the only object ball
           remaining on the table (see Section 3 Rule 4); or
     (e) being awarded by the referee under Section 3 Rule
           14(d)(ii) or Section 4 Rule 1(b), 1(d), 3(b) or 3(c).

2. Game

A game is an agreed or stipulated number of frames.

3. Match

A match is an agreed or stipulated number of games.

4. Balls

     (a) The White ball is the cue-ball.
     (b) The 15 Reds and the 6 colours are the object balls.

                                           10
                          SECTION 2 • SNOOKER

5. Striker and Turn

The person about to play or in play is the striker. It is their turn
until:

     (a) a stroke is played and no points are scored; or
     (b) a foul is committed, all balls have come to rest, and the

           referee is satisfied that the striker has left the table; or
     (c) a request is made to the opponent to play again

           following a foul; or
     (d) the frame is claimed by the striker, when Black is the

           only object ball remaining on the table, aggregate points
           are not relevant, and there is a difference of more than
           seven points between the scores in the striker’s favour; or
     (e) the final Black is potted and the cue-ball has come to
           rest.

6. Stroke

     (a) A stroke is made when the striker strikes the cue-ball
           with the tip of the cue, except while addressing the
           cue-ball (known as feathering).

     (b) The cue-ball must be struck only once and not pushed
           forward. The tip of the cue may momentarily remain in
           contact with the cue-ball after it commences motion.

     (c) A stroke is legal when no infringement of these Rules is
           committed.

     (d) A stroke is not completed until:
           (i) all balls have come to rest;
           (ii) spotting of any balls required is completed; and
           (iii) any ancillary equipment being used by the striker
                 has been removed, or the referee is satisfied that the
                 stroke is completed.

                                           11
                          SECTION 2 • SNOOKER

     (e) A stroke may be made directly or indirectly, thus:
           (i) a stroke is direct when the cue-ball hits an object
                 ball without first hitting a cushion;
           (ii) a stroke is indirect when the cue-ball hits one
                 or more cushions before hitting an object ball.

7. Potting and Pocketing

A pot is when an object ball, after contact with another ball
and without any infringement of these Rules, enters a pocket.
Causing a ball to be potted is known as potting. Causing a ball to
enter a pocket in a foul stroke is known as pocketing.

8. Break

A break is a number of pots in successive strokes made in any
one turn by the striker.

9. In-hand

     (a) The cue-ball is in-hand:
           (i) before the start of each frame;
           (ii) when it has been pocketed;
           (iii) when it has been forced off the table; or
           (iv) when the Black is re-spotted as in Section 3 Rule 4(b).

    (b) The cue-ball remains in-hand until:
           (i) it is played legally from in-hand; or
           (ii) a foul is committed involving the cue-ball while it is
                 not in the striker’s possession.

     (c) The striker is said to be in-hand when the cue-ball is
           in-hand as above.

                                           12
                          SECTION 2 • SNOOKER

10. Ball in Play

     (a) The cue-ball is in play when it is not in-hand.
     (b) Object balls are in play from the start of the frame until

           potted, pocketed or forced off the table.
     (c) Colours become in play again when re-spotted.

11. Ball On

A ball on is any ball which may be legally hit by the first impact
of the cue-ball, or any ball which may not be so hit but which
may be potted.

12. Nominated Ball

     (a) A nominated ball is the object ball which the striker
           indicates to the satisfaction of the referee, or declares
           (states verbally), they undertake to hit with the first
           impact of the cue-ball.

     (b) If requested by the referee, the striker must declare
           which ball they are on.

13. Free Ball

A free ball is a ball, other than the ball on, which the striker
nominates as the ball on when snookered after a foul (see
Section 3 Rule 12).

14. Forced Off the Table

A ball is forced off the table if it comes to rest other than on the
playing area or in a pocket.

15. Infringements, Fouls and Penalties
An infringement is any violation of these Rules.
A foul is an infringement which will end the offender’s turn.
Penalties are infringements which do not affect the order of play.

                                           13
                          SECTION 2 • SNOOKER

16. Penalty Points

Penalty points are awarded to the non-offender after any
infringement.

17. Snookered

The cue-ball is snookered when a direct stroke in a straight line
to every ball on is wholly or partially obstructed by a ball or
balls not on. If one or more balls on can be hit at both extreme
edges free of obstruction by any ball not on, the cue-ball is not
snookered.

     (a) If in-hand, the cue-ball is snookered if it is obstructed as
           described above from all possible positions on or within
           the lines of the “D”.

     (b) If the cue-ball is so obstructed from hitting a ball on by
           more than one ball not on:
           (i) the ball nearest to the cue-ball is considered to be
                 the effective snookering ball; and
           (ii) should more than one obstructing ball be equidistant
                 from the cue-ball, all such balls will be considered to
                 be effective snookering balls.

     (c) When Red is the ball on, if the cue-ball is obstructed
           from hitting different Reds by different balls not on,
           there is no effective snookering ball.

     (d) The striker is said to be snookered when the cue-ball is
           snookered as above.

     (e) The cue-ball cannot be snookered by a cushion.

18. Spot Occupied

A spot is said to be occupied if a ball cannot be placed on it
without that ball touching another ball.

19. Push Stroke

A push stroke is made when the tip of the cue remains in
contact with the cue-ball;

                                           14
                          SECTION 2 • SNOOKER

     (a) after the cue-ball has commenced its motion, other than
           momentarily at the point of initial contact; or

     (b) as the cue-ball contacts an object ball except, where the
           cue-ball and an object ball are almost touching, it shall
           not be deemed a push stroke if the cue-ball hits a very
           fine edge of the object ball.

20. Jump Shot

A jump shot is made when the cue-ball passes over any part of
an object ball, whether hitting it in the process or not, except:

     (a) when the cue-ball first hits one object ball, other than a
           touching ball, and then jumps over another ball; or

     (b) when the cue-ball jumps and hits an object ball, other
           than a touching ball, and at the moment of landing on
           the playing area, the cue-ball is not on the far side of the
           current position of that object ball; or

     (c) when, after legally hitting an object ball, other than a
           touching ball, the cue-ball jumps over that ball after
           hitting a cushion or another ball.

21. Miss

A miss is:
     (a) when the cue-ball fails to first contact a ball on; or
     (b) when a free ball has been nominated, the cue-ball
           fails to first hit the nominated free ball or that ball
           simultaneously with a ball on.

22. Consultation Period

A consultation period is the period in which players may assist the
referee with replacing any ball(s) to the original position prior to
when an infringement was committed (Section 3 Rules 2(c)(ii),
3(k), 10(i), 14, and 16) or as described in Section 3 Rule 9 and 15. The
consultation period starts from the moment the decision is made to
replace the ball(s) and ends when both players are satisfied as to
the position of the ball(s), or by the referee’s final decision.

                                           15
                          SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

SECTION 3 THE GAME

1. Description

Snooker may be played by two players independently, or by more
than two players as sides. The Game is summarised in paragraphs
(a) to (h) below.

     (a) Each player uses the same White cue-ball and there are
           twenty-one object balls – fifteen Reds each valued 1, and
           six colours: Yellow valued 2, Green 3, Brown 4, Blue 5, Pink
           6 and Black 7.

     (b) Scoring strokes in a player’s turn are made by potting Reds
           and colours alternately until all the Reds are off the table
           and then the colours in the ascending order of their value.

     (c) Points awarded for scoring strokes are added to the score
           of the striker.

     (d) Penalty points from infringements are added to the
           opponent’s score.

     (e) A tactic employed at any time during a frame is to leave
           the cue-ball behind a ball not on such that it is snookered
           for the next player. If a player or side requires more points
           than are available from the balls remaining on the table,
           then the laying of snookers in the hope of gaining points
           from fouls becomes most important.

     (f) The winner of a frame is the player or side:
           (i) with the highest score;
           (ii) to whom the frame is conceded; or
           (iii) to whom the frame is awarded under Section 3 Rule
                 14(d)(ii) or Section 4 Rule 1(b), 1(d), 3(b) or 3(c).

     (g) The winner of a game is the player or side:
           (i) winning the most, or required, number of frames;
           (ii) making the greatest total where aggregate points are
                 relevant; or
           (iii) to whom the game is awarded under Section 4 Rule
                 1(c) or 1(d).

                                           16
                          SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

     (h) The winner of a match is the player or side winning
           the most games or, where aggregate points are
           relevant, with the greatest total.

2. Position of Balls

     (a) At the start of each frame, the cue-ball is in-hand and
           the object balls are positioned on the table as follows:
           (i) the Reds in the form of a tightly-packed
                 equilateral triangle, with the Red at the apex
                 situated on the centre longitudinal line of the
                 table, above the Pink Spot such that it will be as
                 close to the Pink Spot as possible without
                 occupying it, and the base of the triangle parallel
                 with the Top Cushion;
           (ii) the six colours on the spots designated in Section
                 1 Rule 1(f).

     (b) If an error in setting up the table is made, Section 3
           Rule 7(c) shall apply, the frame starting as in Section
           3 Rule 3(c).

     (c) After a frame has started, a ball in play may only be
           cleaned by the referee upon reasonable request by
           the striker and:
           (i) the position of the ball shall be marked by a
                 suitable device prior to the ball being lifted for
                 cleaning;
           (ii) the device used to mark the position of a ball
                 shall be regarded as, and acquire the value of, the
                 ball until such time as the ball has been replaced. It
                 is an infringement if any player contacts the device.
                 The referee shall award the relevant penalty points
                 to the non-offender and replace the device or ball to
                 its original position, if necessary, even if it was
                 picked up.
                 A consultation period starts when the decision is
                 made to replace the device or ball.

                                           17
                          SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

3. Mode of Play

The players shall determine the order of play by lot or in any
mutually agreed manner, the winner having the choice of which
player plays first.

     (a) The order of play thus determined must remain
           unaltered throughout the frame, except that a
           player may be asked by the next player to play
           again after any foul.

     (b) The player or side to play first must alternate for
           each frame during a game.

     (c) The first player plays from in-hand, the frame
           commencing when the cue-ball has been placed on
           the playing area and contacted by the tip of the cue
           either:
           (i) as a stroke is made; or
           (ii) while addressing the cue-ball.

     (d) If a frame is started by the wrong player or side:
           (i) it shall be re-started correctly, without penalty,
                 if only one stroke has been played and no
                 infringement has been committed since; or
           (ii) it shall continue in the normal way if another
                 stroke is made, or if an infringement is
                 committed during the first stroke or after the
                 completion of the first stroke, with the correct
                 order of starting being resumed in the following
                 frame such that one player or side will have
                 started in three consecutive frames; or
           (iii) it shall, in the event of a stalemate being
                 declared (see Section 3 Rule 17), be re-started
                 by the correct player or side.

     (e) For a stroke to be legal, none of the infringements
           described in Section 3 Rule 11 must occur.

     (f) It is the striker’s responsibility to ensure that all objects
           or ancillary equipment from this turn or previous turns
           are removed from the table.

                                           18
         SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

(g) For the first stroke of each turn, until all Reds are off the
     table, Red or a free ball nominated as a Red is the ball
     on, and the value of each Red and any free ball
     nominated as a Red, potted in the same stroke, is scored.

(h) (i)  If a Red, or a free ball nominated as a Red, is potted,
         the same player plays the next stroke and the next
         ball on is a colour of the striker’s choice which, if
         potted, is scored and the colour is then spotted.

(ii) The break is continued by potting Reds and colours
      alternately until all the Reds are off the table and,
      where applicable, a colour has been played at
      following the potting of the last Red.

(iii) The colours then become on in the ascending order
      of their value as per Section 3 Rule 1(a) and when
      next potted remain off the table, except as provided
      for in Section 3 Rule 4, and the striker plays the next
      stroke at the next colour on.

(iv) In the event that the striker, in a break, plays before
      the referee has completed spotting a colour while all
      other balls are at rest, the value of the colour shall
      not be scored and Section 3 Rule 11(a)(i) or 11(b)(ii)
      shall apply as appropriate.

(i) Reds are not usually replaced on the table once potted,
     pocketed or forced off the table regardless of the fact
     that a player may thus benefit from a foul. However,
     exceptions are provided for in Section 3 Rules 2(c)(ii),
     3(k), 9, 10(i), 14(b), 14(e), 15, 16, 20(b) and Section 5 Rule
     1(a)(i).

(j) If the striker fails to pot a ball, they must leave the table
     without undue delay. In the event that they should
     commit any foul before, or while leaving the table, they
     will be penalised as provided for in Section 3 Rule 11.
     The next stroke is then played from where the cue-ball
     comes to rest, or from in-hand if the cue-ball is not in
     play, except when the cue-ball is replaced in accordance
     with Section 3 Rules 10(i), 14(e) and 16.

         19
                          SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

     (k) It is a penalty if the non-striker comes to the table, out
           of turn, and commits any infringement. The referee shall
           call PENALTY and any ball(s) moved shall be replaced to
           their position prior to the infringement, and the striker’s
           turn will continue unaffected.
           A consultation period starts when the decision is made
           to replace the ball(s).

     (l) Following the final stroke of the opponent’s turn, or
           following a foul, if an incoming player strikes the cue-ball
           or commits an infringement before the balls have come
           to rest, or before the referee has completed the spotting
           of a colour, they shall be penalised as if they were the
           striker and their turn will end.

    (m) If any ball enters a pocket and rebounds onto the
           playing area, it does not count as having been potted
           or pocketed. No player has redress if this occurs.

4. End of Frame, Game or Match

     (a) When Black is the only object ball remaining on the
           table, the first pot or foul ends the frame
           excepting only if the following conditions both apply:
           (i) the scores are then equal; and
           (ii) aggregate scores are not relevant.

     (b) When both conditions in (a) above apply:
           (i) the Black is spotted;
           (ii) the players draw lots for choice of playing next;
           (iii) the next player plays from in-hand; and
           (iv) the first pot or infringement ends the frame.

     (c) When aggregate scores determine the winner of a game
           or match, and the aggregate scores are equal at the end
           of the last frame, the players in that frame shall follow
           the procedure, commonly known as a re-spotted Black,
           set out in (b) above.

                                           20
                          SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

5. Playing from In-hand

To play from in-hand, the cue-ball must be contacted by the tip
of the cue from a position on or within the lines of the “D”, but it
may be played in any direction.

     (a) The referee will state, if asked, whether the cue-ball is
           properly placed (that is, not outside the lines of the “D”).

     (b) If the cue-ball, while in-hand, is contacted by the tip
           of the cue while outside the “D”, it is considered as
           improperly played from in-hand.

     (c) If the tip of the cue should touch the cue-ball while
           positioning it, and the referee is satisfied that the striker
           was not attempting to play a stroke, then the cue-ball is
           not in play.

6. Hitting Two Balls Simultaneously

Two balls, other than two Reds or a free ball and a ball on, must
not be hit simultaneously by the first impact of the cue-ball.

7. Spotting Colours

Any colour potted, pocketed or forced off the table shall be
spotted before the next stroke is made, until finally potted under
Section 3 Rule 3(h)(iii).

     (a) A player shall not be held responsible for any mistake by
           the referee in failing to spot any ball correctly.

     (b) If a colour is spotted in error after being potted in
           ascending order as per Section 3 Rule 3(h)(iii), it shall be
           removed from the table without penalty when the error
           is discovered, and play shall continue from the resulting
           position. If the error is discovered after the colour has
           been potted, the points scored shall count after the next
           stroke is played, or after an infringement is committed
           prior to playing the next stroke.

                                           21
                    SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

(c) If a stroke is made with a ball or balls not correctly
     spotted, they shall be considered correctly spotted for
     subsequent strokes. Any colour incorrectly missing from
     the table shall be spotted:

     (i) without penalty when discovered if missing due
            to previous oversight, provided the frame has not
            already ended under the terms of Section 2 Rule 1
            and play shall continue from the resulting position;
            or

     (ii) subject to penalty if the striker played before the
            referee was able to complete the spotting.

(d) If a Red is spotted in error, instead of a colour, once
     discovered:

     (i) if the Red can be identified it will be removed from
            the table; or

     (ii) if the Red can be identified but has been potted,
            pocketed or forced off the table, or the colour was
            already spotted as described in (c) above, or if the
            Red cannot be identified, the frame continues thus
            effectively creating a sixteen Red frame. In cases
            where the colour is missing from the table it shall be
            spotted and in all cases play shall continue from
            the resulting position without penalty.

(e) If a colour has to be spotted and its own spot is
     occupied, it shall be placed on the highest value spot
     available.

(f) If there is more than one colour to be spotted and their
     own spots are occupied, the highest value ball shall take
     precedence in order of spotting.

(g) If all spots are occupied, the colour shall be placed as
     near to its own spot as possible, between that spot and
     the nearest part of the Top Cushion.

(h) In the case of Pink and Black, if all spots are occupied
     and there is no available space between the relevant
     spot and the nearest part of the Top Cushion, the colour
     shall be placed as near to its own spot as possible on the
     centre longitudinal line of the table.

                                     22
                          SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

     (i) In all cases, the colour when spotted must not be
           touching another ball.

     (j) A colour, to be properly spotted, must be placed on the
           spot designated in these Rules.

8. Touching Ball

     (a) If at the completion of a stroke the cue-ball is touching a
           ball or balls on, or that could be on, the referee shall call
           TOUCHING BALL and, in the event of any doubt,
           indicate which ball or balls on the cue-ball is touching. If
           the cue-ball is touching one or more colours after a Red
           (or a free ball nominated as a Red) has been potted, the
           referee shall also ask the striker to DECLARE which
           colour they are on.

     (b) When a TOUCHING BALL has been called, the striker
           must play the cue-ball away from that ball without
           moving it or it is a push stroke.

     (c) Providing the striker, in playing a stroke, does not cause
           any touching object ball to move, there shall be no
           penalty if:
           (i) the ball is on;
           (ii) the ball could be on and the striker declares they are
                 on it; or
           (iii) the ball could be on and the striker declares, and
                 first hits, another ball that could be on.

     (d) If the cue-ball comes to rest touching or nearly touching
           a ball that is not on, the referee, if asked whether it is
           touching, will clarify the situation.

     (e) When the cue-ball is touching both a ball on and a ball
           not on, the referee shall only indicate the ball on as
           touching. If the striker should ask the referee whether
           the cue-ball is also touching the ball not on, they are
           entitled to be told.

     (f) It is not a foul if the referee is satisfied that any
           movement of a touching ball at the moment of striking
           was not caused by the striker.

                                           23
                          SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

     (g) If a stationary object ball, not touching the cue-ball when
           examined by the referee, is later seen to be in contact
           with the cue-ball before a stroke has been made, the
           balls shall be repositioned by the referee to their
           satisfaction. This also applies to a touching ball which
           later, when examined by the referee, is not touching.

9. Ball on Edge of Pocket

When a ball falls into a pocket without being hit by another ball,
and

     (a) being no part of any stroke in progress, it shall be
           replaced and any points scored shall count.

     (b) If it would have been hit by any ball involved in a stroke:
           (i) with no infringement of these Rules (including cases
                 where an infringement would have occurred but for
                 the ball falling into a pocket), all balls will be replaced
                 and the same stroke played again, or a different stroke
                 may be played by the same striker at their discretion;
           (ii) if a foul is committed, the striker incurs the penalty
                 prescribed in Section 3 Rule 11, all balls will be replaced
                 and the next player has the usual options after a foul.

     (c) If a ball balances momentarily on the edge of a pocket and
           then falls in, it shall be considered potted or pocketed and
           shall not be replaced.

     A consultation period starts when the decision is made to
     replace the ball(s).

10. Fouls

If a foul is committed, the referee shall immediately call FOUL.
     (a) If the striker has not made a stroke, their turn ends
           and the referee shall announce the penalty.
     (b) If a stroke has been made, the referee will wait until
           completion of the stroke before announcing the
           penalty.

                                           24
                    SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

(c) If a foul or a penalty is neither awarded by the referee, nor
     successfully claimed by the non-striker before the
     next stroke is made, it is condoned.

(d) Any colour not correctly spotted shall remain where
     positioned except that if off the table it shall be
     correctly spotted.

(e) All points scored in a break before a foul is awarded
     shall count but the striker shall not score any points
     for any ball pocketed in a foul stroke.

(f) The next stroke is played from where the cue-ball
     comes to rest or, if the cue-ball is not in play, from
     in-hand.

(g) If more than one foul is committed in the same stroke,
     the highest value penalty shall be incurred.

(h) The player who committed the foul:
     (i) incurs the penalty points prescribed in Section 3
            Rule 11; and
     (ii) has to play the next stroke if requested by the
            next player.

(i) If a striker fouls any ball including the cue-ball prior to
     striking it, the appropriate penalty will be imposed.
     The non-offender may then elect to play themselves
     from the position left, or request the offender to play
     again from the position left or the original position.
     In the latter case, all balls shall be replaced and the
     ball on shall be the same as it was prior to the
     infringement, namely:
     (i) any Red, where Red was the ball on;
     (ii) the colour on, where all the Reds were off the
            table;
     (iii) a colour of the striker’s choice, where the ball on
            was a colour after a Red, or a free ball nominated
            as a Red had been potted.
     A consultation period starts when the request is made
     to replace the ball(s).

                                     25
                          SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

     (j) If an object ball in play is disturbed by the striker
           while the cue-ball is in-hand, the referee shall call
           FOUL and the cue-ball will remain in-hand for the
           next stroke, unless the foul is committed involving
           the cue-ball while it is not in the striker’s possession.

11. Penalty Values

The following acts are fouls and incur four penalty points unless
higher penalty points are indicated in paragraphs (a) to (d)
below.

     (a) Value of the ball on by:
           (i) striking before the referee has completed the
                 spotting of a colour taken as a free ball;
           (ii) striking the cue-ball more than once during a
                 stroke;
           (iii) striking when both feet are off the floor;
           (iv) playing out of turn in Four-handed Snooker;
           (v) playing improperly from in-hand, including at
                 the opening stroke;
           (vi) causing the cue-ball to fail to contact any
                 object ball;
           (vii) causing the cue-ball to be pocketed;
           (viii) causing the cue-ball to be snookered by the
                 nominated free ball, except as provided for in
                 Section 3 Rule 12(b)(ii);
           (ix) causing the cue-ball to be snookered by the
                 nominated ball in Six Reds Snooker;
           (x) playing a jump shot;
           (xi) playing with a non-standard cue; or
           (xii) conferring or communicating with a partner
                 contrary to Section 3 Rule 18(e).

                                           26
                    SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

(b) Value of the ball on or ball concerned, whichever is
     higher, by:
     (i) striking when any ball is not at rest;
     (ii) striking before the referee has completed the
            spotting of a colour that is not a free ball;
     (iii) causing a ball not on to be pocketed;
     (iv) causing the cue-ball to first hit a ball not on or, when
            a free ball is nominated, causing the cue-ball to first
            hit any ball other than the nominated free ball unless
            it was hit simultaneously with a ball on;
     (v) making a push stroke;
     (vi) contacting, with any part of the player’s person,
            attire or equipment, a ball in play, or any device used
            to mark a ball in play;
     (vii) contacting a ball in play with the cue-ball, while the
            cue-ball is in-hand;
     (viii) causing a ball in play to contact any object or
            equipment left at or on the table during the turn or
            from previous turns;
     (ix) striking before any balls removed for cleaning have
            been returned to the table; or
     (x) causing a ball to be forced off the table;

(c) Value of the ball on or higher value of the two balls
     concerned by causing the cue-ball to first hit
     simultaneously two balls, other than two Reds (when
     Red is the ball on) or a nominated free ball and a ball on.

(d) Seven points if the striker:
     (i) uses a ball off the table for any purpose;
     (ii) uses any object to measure gaps or distance;
     (iii) plays at Reds, or a nominated free ball followed by a
            Red, in successive strokes;
     (iv) uses any ball other than White as the cue-ball after
            the frame has started;

                                     27
                          SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

           (v) fails to declare which ball they are on when
                 requested to do so by the referee; or

           (vi) after potting a Red (or free ball nominated as a Red),
                 commits a foul before a colour has been nominated.

The following acts are penalties and incur four penalty points
unless higher penalty points are indicated in paragraphs (e) to
(g) below.

     (e) Value of the ball on or ball concerned, whichever is
           higher by committing an infringement, out of turn, as
           described in Section 3 Rule 3(k).

     (f) Seven points if any player contacts, with any part of
           their person, attire or equipment, any ball on the playing
           area during a consultation period.

     (g) Seven points if the non-striker:
           (i) uses a ball off the table for any purpose; or
           (ii) uses any object to measure gaps or distance.

12. Snookered After a Foul

After a foul, if the cue-ball is snookered (see Section 2 Rule 17),
the referee shall call FREE BALL.

     (a) If the player next in turn elects to play the next stroke:
           (i) they may nominate any ball as the ball on, but a free
                 ball cannot be the ball on;
           (ii) any nominated free ball shall be regarded as, and
                 acquire the value of, the ball on except that, if
                 potted, it shall then be spotted.

     (b) It is a foul if the cue-ball should:
           (i) fail to hit the nominated free ball first unless it was
                 hit simultaneously with a ball on; or
           (ii) after a non-scoring stroke, be snookered on all Reds
                 or the ball on by the nominated free ball, except
                 when there are only two object balls remaining on
                 the table i.e. Pink and Black, or Black and one other
                 colour as described in Section 3, Rule 7.

                                           28
                          SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

     (c) If the nominated free ball is potted, it is spotted and the
           value of the ball on is scored.

     (d) If a ball on is potted, after the cue-ball hit the nominated
           free ball first, or simultaneously with a ball on, the ball on
           is scored and remains off the table.

     (e) If both the nominated free ball and a ball on are potted,
           only the ball on is scored unless it was a Red, when each
           ball potted is scored. The nominated free ball is then
           spotted and the ball on remains off the table.

     (f) If the offender is asked to play again, or a request is
           made by the non-offender for the replacement of the
           ball(s) (as in Section 3 Rules 10(i), 14(b), 14(e) and 16),
           the free ball option becomes void.

13. Play Again

Once a player has requested an opponent to play again after a
foul or requested the replacement of ball(s) after a foul or a Foul
and a Miss, such request cannot be withdrawn. The offender,
having been asked to play again, is entitled to:

     (a) change their mind as to:
           (i) which stroke they will play; and
           (ii) which ball on they will attempt to hit.

     (b) score points for any ball(s) they may pot.

14. Foul and a Miss

     (a) The striker shall, to the best of their ability, endeavour to
           hit the ball on or a ball that could be on after a Red, or
           a free ball nominated as a Red, has been potted. If the
           referee considers the Rule infringed, they shall call FOUL
           AND A MISS unless:
           (i) any player required penalty points before, or as a
                 result of, the stroke being played and the referee is
                 satisfied that the miss was not intentional;
           (ii) a situation exists where it is impossible to hit the ball
                 on. In the latter case it must be assumed the striker

                                           29
                    SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

            is attempting to hit the ball on provided that they
            play, directly or indirectly, at the ball on with
            sufficient strength, in the referee’s opinion, to have
            reached the ball on but for the obstructing ball(s).

(b) After a FOUL AND A MISS has been called, the
     non-offender may request the offender to play again from
     the position left or the original position, in which latter case
     all balls shall be replaced and the ball on shall be the same
     as it was prior to the last stroke made, namely:

     (i) any Red, where Red was the ball on;

     (ii) the colour on, where all Reds were off the table; or

     (iii) a colour of the striker’s choice, where the ball on was a
            colour after a Red, or a free ball nominated as a Red
            had been potted.

(c) If the striker, in making a stroke, fails to first hit a ball on
     when there is a clear path in a straight line from the
     cue-ball to any part of any ball that is or could be on, the
     referee shall call FOUL AND A MISS unless as described
     under Section 3 Rule 14(a)(i).

(d) After a FOUL AND A MISS has been called under
     paragraph (c) above when there was a clear path in a
     straight line from the cue-ball to a ball that was on
     or could have been on, such that central, full ball, contact
     was available (in the case of Reds, this to be taken as a full
     diameter of any Red that is not obstructed by a colour), or
     when the cue-ball is touching a ball that could be on, then:

     (i) a second failure to first hit a ball on in making a stroke
            from the original position shall be called as a FOUL
            AND A MISS regardless of the difference in scores;

     (ii) in the event of a second failure as in (i) above, if asked
            to play again from the original position, the offender
            shall be Warned by the referee that a further failure
            will result in the frame being awarded to their
            opponent. However, a frame cannot be awarded if a
            Warning has not been issued. If the referee has not
            issued the Warning, provided the sequence of FOUL
            AND A MISS calls has continued, the striker will be
            Warned at the first available opportunity;

                                     30
                          SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

           (iii) if asked to play from the position left, the Foul and a
                 Miss sequence as in (d)(i) and (d)(ii) ends.

     (e) After all balls have been replaced under this Rule, and the
           striker fouls any ball, including the cue-ball, a MISS will not
           be called if a stroke has not been played. In this case the
           appropriate penalty will be imposed. The non-offender
           may then elect to play themselves from the position left, or
           request the offender to play again from the position left or
           the original position, in which latter case all balls shall be
           replaced and the ball on shall be the same as it was prior
           to the last stroke made, namely:
           (i) any Red, where Red was the ball on;
           (ii) the colour on, where all Reds were off the table; or
           (iii) a colour of the striker’s choice, where the ball on was
                 a colour after a Red, or a free ball nominated as a
                 Red had been potted.
           If the above situation arises during a sequence of FOUL
           AND A MISS calls as described under paragraph (d)
           above, any Warning concerning the possible awarding
           of the frame to their opponent shall only remain in
           effect when all balls have been replaced to their original
           position prior to the infringement.

     (f) If, after a FOUL AND A MISS has been called, the
           request is made to play from the original position, a
           consultation period starts.

15. Ball Moved by Other than Striker

If a ball, stationary or moving, is disturbed other than by
the striker, it shall be replaced by the referee to the position
they deem the ball was, or would have come to rest, without
penalising the striker.
A consultation period starts when the decision is made to
replace the ball(s).

     (a) This Rule shall include cases where another occurrence
           or person, other than the striker’s partner causes the
           striker to move a ball, but will not apply in cases where a

                                           31
                          SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

           ball moves due to any defect in the table surface, except
           in the case where a spotted ball moves before the next
           stroke has been made.

     (b) No player shall be penalised for any disturbance of balls
           by the referee.

16. Ball Intentionally Moved

Other than striking the cue-ball to make a stroke, or contacting a
ball during a consultation period, if any ball is intentionally moved or
picked up by the striker from the playing area, the referee shall call
FOUL.

     (a) In a situation where a stationary ball is intentionally
           moved or picked up, the non-offender may then;

           (i) elect to play themselves or request their opponent
                  to play from the position left. For this situation,
                  any ball that did not come to rest on the playing
                  area will be considered forced off the table.

           (ii) elect to have all balls replaced to their original position
                  and play themselves or request their opponent to play
                  again. In the latter case the ball on shall be the same as
                  it was prior to the infringement, namely;

                  (i) any Red, where Red was the ball on;

                  (ii) the colour on, where all the Reds were off the table;

                  (iii) a colour of the striker’s choice, where the ball on
                        was a colour after a Red, or a free ball nominated
                        as a Red had been potted.

                  If the above situation arises during a sequence of FOUL
                  AND A MISS calls as described under Section 3 Rule
                  14(d) and the request is made for the offender to play
                  again, any Warning concerning the possible awarding of
                  the frame to their opponent shall remain in effect.

     (b) In a situation where a moving ball is intentionally moved or
           picked up, the referee shall make the best possible decision
           in the interest of fair play.

     (c) If the striker strikes the cue-ball to make a stroke as an act of
           Unsporting Conduct, they may be Warned as described in
           Section 4, Rule 1 and the non-offender will have the options
           as described under (a) and (b) above.

A consultation period starts when the decision is made to replace the ball(s).

                                           32
                          SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

17. Stalemate

If the referee thinks a position of stalemate exists, or is being
approached, or is indicated by both players, the referee shall offer
the players the immediate option of re-starting the frame. This
process is commonly referred to as a re-rack.

    (a) If any player objects, the referee shall allow play to
           continue with the proviso that the situation must change
           within a stated period, usually after three more strokes to
           each side but at the referee’s discretion.

    (b) If the situation remains basically unchanged after the
           stated period has expired, the referee shall nullify all scores
           and re-set all balls as for the start of a frame.

    (c) The same player shall again make the opening stroke,
           subject to Section 3 Rule 3(d)(iii), with the same
           established order of play being maintained.

    (d) If a stalemate occurs during a re-spotted Black as
           described in Section 3 Rule 4(b), only the Black will be
           spotted with the same player to make the opening stroke.

18. Four-handed Snooker

     (a) In a four-handed game (four players constituting two sides
           of two players) each side shall start alternate frames and
           the order of play shall be determined at the start of each
           frame and, when so determined, must be maintained
           throughout that frame.

     (b) Players may change the order of play at the start of each
           new frame.

     (c) If a foul is committed and a request to play again is made,
           the player who committed the foul plays the next stroke
           and the order of play is unchanged. If the FOUL was called
           for playing out of turn, the offender’s partner will lose a
           turn, whether or not the offender is asked to play again.

                                           33
                          SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

     (d) When a frame ends in a tie, Section 3 Rule 4 applies. If a
           re-spotted Black is necessary, the side who play the first
           stroke have the choice of which player will make that stroke.
           The order of play must then continue as in the frame.

     (e) Partners may confer or communicate during a frame but
           not while one is the striker and has approached the table
           until their turn has ended.

     (f) If the striker’s partner commits an infringement, the striker
           will be considered as the offender.

19. Six Reds Snooker

In a Six Reds Snooker game the official Rules of the Game of
Snooker apply with the following variations.

     (a) There will be no more than five consecutive FOUL AND A
           MISS calls if the offender is requested to play again from
           the original position.

     (b) After the fourth consecutive FOUL AND A MISS call, the
           referee shall Warn the offending player that should a FOUL
           AND A MISS be called again the non-offender may:
           (i) play from where the balls have come to rest; or
           (ii) ask their opponent to play from where the balls have
                 come to rest; or
           (iii) play the cue-ball from any position on the playing
                 area, unless any player needed penalty points before,
                 or as a result of, the last stroke being played. If this
                 option is chosen, Section 3 Rule 12 shall not apply.

     (c) If, after a FOUL AND A MISS call, the offender is requested
           to play from the position left, the previous Foul and a Miss
           sequence ends.

     (d) After potting a Red, or a free ball nominated as a Red, the
           striker must not leave their opponent snookered behind
           the nominated colour as described in Section 2 Rule 17.

                                           34
                          SECTION 3 • SNOOKER

20. Use of Ancillary Equipment

It is the responsibility of the striker to both place and remove any
equipment they may use at the table.

     (a) The striker is responsible for all items including, but not
           limited to, rests and extensions that they bring to the table,
           whether owned by them or borrowed (except from the
           referee), and they will be penalised for any fouls made
           when using this equipment.

     (b) Equipment normally found at the table which has been
           provided by another party, including the referee, is not the
           responsibility of the striker. It is not a foul if this equipment
           should prove to be faulty and thereby cause the striker
           to contact a ball or balls. The referee will, if necessary,
           reposition any balls in accordance with Section 3 Rule 15
           and the striker, if in a break, will be allowed to continue
           without penalty.

21. Interpretation

     (a) Circumstances may necessitate adjustment in how these
           Rules are applied for persons with disabilities. In
           particular and for example:
           (i) Section 3 Rule 11(a)(iii) cannot be applied to players
                 in wheelchairs; and
           (ii) a player, upon request to the referee, shall be told
                 the colour of a ball or its position if they are unable
                 to differentiate between colours as, for example,
                 Red and Green.

     (b) When there is no referee, the opposing player or side
           will be regarded as such for the purpose of these Rules.

     (c) Under these Rules of the Game, a simplified form of
           snooker can be played with any number of Red balls.

                                           35
                         SECTION 4 • SNOOKER

SECTION 4 THE PLAYERS

1. Unsporting Conduct

     (a) In the event of
           (i) a player using offensive language, or making
                 offensive gestures; or
           (ii) any conduct by a player which in the opinion of the
                 referee is wilfully or persistently Unsporting; or
           (iii) any other conduct by a player which otherwise
                 amounts to Unsporting Conduct; or
           (iv) any player refusing to continue the current frame;
           the referee shall Warn the player that in the event of
           any further Unsporting Conduct the frame will be
           awarded to their opponent.

     (b) If the referee has Warned the player under (a) above,
           in the event of any further Unsporting Conduct, the
           referee shall award the frame to their opponent, or, if this
           happens between frames, the referee shall award the
           next frame to their opponent, and the referee shall Warn
           the player that in the event of any further Unsporting
           Conduct the game will be awarded to their opponent.

     (c) If a referee has awarded a frame to a player’s opponent,
           under (b) above or (d) below, in the event of any further
           Unsporting Conduct by the player concerned, the
           referee shall award the game to the player’s opponent.

     (d) In the event that the conduct, in the opinion of the
           referee is sufficiently serious, the referee shall award the
           frame or the game to the player’s opponent, even if
           previous Warnings for Unsporting Conduct were not
           issued.

     (e) Any decision by the referee to award a frame and/or
           game to a player’s opponent shall be final and shall not
           be subject to any appeal.

                                           36
                         SECTION 4 • SNOOKER

2. Conceding

     (a) A player may offer a concession, but this becomes null
           and void if their opponent chooses to play on.

     (b) A player shall not concede a frame in any game, or
           match unless any player requires penalty points. Any
           breach of this Rule shall be regarded as Unsporting
           Conduct by the player concerned. If the referee has
           already Warned the player under Rule 1(a) above, the
           next frame shall be awarded to their opponent.

     (c) If a player touches or moves a ball(s) in play to indicate
           the offering of a concession, the referee will not call
           FOUL or PENALTY if the concession is accepted by their
           opponent. If the concession is not accepted, Section 3
           Rule 16 or Section 3 Rule 3(k) shall apply.

     (d) If a player, prior to needing penalty points to win the
           frame, intentionally commits an infringement so that,
           as a result, they now require penalty points, it will be
           deemed as Unsporting Conduct and the player shall be
           Warned by the referee as in Rule 1(a) or 1(b) above.

     (e) The offer, or the acceptance of a concession, cannot
           be withdrawn.

     (f) When aggregate scores determine the winner of a game
           or a match and a frame is conceded, the opponent shall
           receive the equivalent of the value of any balls remaining
           on the table, where Reds shall count as eight points
           each and any colour incorrectly off the table shall be
           counted as if spotted.

3. Time Wasting

     (a) In the event of a player taking an abnormal amount of
           time over a stroke, or the selection of a stroke, the referee
           shall Warn the player that in the event of any further Time
           Wasting during the game, the frame will be awarded to
           their opponent.

                                           37
                         SECTION 4 • SNOOKER

     (b) If the referee has Warned the player for Time Wasting
           under (a) above, in the event of any further Time Wasting
           by that player, the referee shall award the frame to their
           opponent.

     (c) If a referee has awarded a frame to a player’s opponent
           for Time Wasting, in the event of any further Time
           Wasting by the player concerned, the referee shall, each
           time thereafter, award a frame to the player’s opponent.

4. Penalty

     (a) If a frame is forfeited under this Section, the offender
           shall:
           (i) lose the relevant frame; and
           (ii) when aggregate scores determine the winner of a
                 game or match, forfeit all points scored and the
                 opponent shall receive the equivalent of the value of
                 any balls remaining on the table, where Reds shall
                 count as eight points each and any colour incorrectly
                 off the table shall be counted as if spotted.

     (b) If a game is forfeited under this Section, the offender shall:
           (i) lose the relevant frame; and
           (ii) additionally, lose the required number of unplayed
                 frames to complete the game where frames are
                 relevant; or
           (iii) additionally, lose the remaining frames, each valued
                 at 147 points, where aggregate points determine the
                 winner of the game.

5. Non-striker

The non-striker shall, when the striker is playing, avoid standing
or moving in the line of sight of the striker. They shall sit or stand
at a reasonable distance from the table and avoid making any
movement or action that may interrupt the concentration of the
striker.

                                           38
                         SECTION 4 • SNOOKER
6. Scoring Responsibility
As well as the referee, it is the players’ responsibility to make sure
that the correct score is being applied, either on the scoreboard or
by the referee announcing the scores. If any player notices that the
score is incorrect, it is their responsibility to inform the referee at
the earliest opportunity.
7. Absence
In the case of their absence from the table, the non-striker
may appoint a deputy to watch in their interest and claim an
infringement if necessary. Such appointment must be made known
to the referee prior to departure.

                                           39
                          SECTION 5 • SNOOKER

SECTION 5 THE OFFICIALS

1. The Referee

     (a) The referee shall:
           (i) make decisions in the interests of fair play for any
                 situation not covered adequately by these Rules;
           (ii) be responsible for proper conduct during a match
                 under these Rules;
           (iii) intervene if they see any infringement of these Rules;
           (iv) tell a player the colour of a ball, or its position, if
                 requested; and
           (v) clean any ball upon reasonable request by the
                 striker.

     (b) The referee shall not:
           (i) answer any question not authorised in these Rules;
                 nor
           (ii) give any indication that a player is about to commit
                 an infringement; nor
           (iii) give any advice or opinion on situations that could
                 affect play; nor
           (iv) answer any question regarding the difference in
                 scores.

     (c) If the referee has failed to notice any incident, they
           may at their discretion take the evidence of the marker
           or other officials or spectators best placed for the
           observation or, if available, they may view a camera/
           video recording of the incident to assist their decision.

                                          40
                          SECTION 5 • SNOOKER

2. The Marker
The marker shall keep the score on the scoreboard and assist
the referee in carrying out their duties. The marker shall also act
as a stroke recorder if necessary.
3. The Stroke Recorder
The stroke recorder shall maintain a record of each stroke or
infringement and how many points are scored by each player or
side as required. They shall also make a note of break totals and
Warnings where issued.
4. Assistance by Officials

     (a) At the striker’s request, the referee or marker shall
           move and hold in position any lighting apparatus that
           interferes with the action of the striker in making a
           stroke.

     (b) It is permissible for the referee or marker to give
           necessary assistance to players with disabilities
           according to their circumstances.

                                           41
   SNOOKER
  SHOOTOUT
COMPETITION

     RULES

             42
                          SNOOKER SHOOTOUT

SNOOKER SHOOTOUT COMPETITION RULES

Subject to the modifications below, the Official Rules of the
Game of Snooker apply and their standard definitions used
throughout these Rules are hereinafter italicised.

Timing

     1. Each match will be played over a maximum of 10 minutes.
           The match clock shall commence from the moment the
           cue-ball is struck for the initial opening stroke.

     2. A shot clock will be started by the timing official in
           agreement with the referee. It will stop at the exact
           moment the player strikes the cue-ball.

     3. Maximum shot clock durations:
           (i) during the first five minutes of the match, a stroke
                 must commence within 15 seconds.
           (ii) during the last five minutes of the match, a stroke
                 must commence within 10 seconds.
           Failure to commence a stroke within the allotted time
           will result in a time foul being awarded.

     4. The timing official will start the shot clock;
           (i) when all balls have come to rest and the spotting of
                 any balls required is completed; or
           (ii) when the referee calls out the relevant break score;
                 or
           (iii) after an infringement, when the referee hands the
                 cue-ball to the incoming player or places the cue-
                 ball on the playing area.

     5. If the referee requires time to make a decision, they can
           decide to either pause the shot clock or the match clock
           and will notify the timing official when to re-start.

     6. If the referee is unable to make a definitive decision, or
           is being notified by the marker that a review of the last
           stroke is necessary, they may use a video and
           audio replay in order to assist their decision and the
           referee will notify the timing official to pause the match

                                           43
                          SNOOKER SHOOTOUT

           clock. This process of review will be conducted at the
           marker’s desk while both players will wait at the table. If
           such a decision for a review is not requested before the
           next stroke is made, any potential incident is condoned.

     7. Should a player have reason to question a refereeing
           decision, the shot clock will not be paused unless the
           referee deems it necessary. The referee shall then
           call TIME OUT and the shot clock shall be paused
           by the timing official. The referee shall then decide
           whether to re-start or re-set the shot clock.

     8. If a player asks the referee to clean a ball, the shot
           clock will not be paused unless the referee deems it
           necessary. The referee shall then call TIME OUT and
           the shot clock shall be paused by the timing official and
           re-started by indication from the referee.

     9. Should there be a shot clock or match clock malfunction,
           the referee’s decision will be final.

Mode of Play

     10. Players ‘Lag’ to determine the order of play. In a Lag,
           both players simultaneously strike a cue-ball each from
           the Baulk-line towards the Top Cushion to rebound back
           towards Baulk. The player whose ball finishes nearest
           to the Bottom Cushion, in the opinion of the referee,
           wins the Lag and has the choice of which player plays
           first. In a Lag, the cue-ball may only hit the Top or
           Bottom Cushions. Hitting anything other than these
           cushions will result in a forfeit of the Lag.

     11. Provided a stroke commences within the allotted time,
           the stroke will be completed regardless of the shot clock
           or match clock expiring and any points scored or penalty
           points shall be awarded.

     12. In the case of a ‘stalemate’ the players are responsible
           for resolving the situation within the allotted timescale.
           There is no option for a re-rack.

     13. When Black is the only object ball remaining on the
           table, the first pot or infringement ends the match even
           when the scores are then equal.

                                           44
                          SNOOKER SHOOTOUT

     14. Should the scores be equal at the end of the match, a
           sudden death Blue ball shootout will commence. The
           Blue ball will be placed on its Spot and the cue-ball must
           be struck from on or within the lines of the “D”. The
           player who won the Lag prior to the match starting will
           have the choice of who plays first. Alternate attempts
           will be made until one player has potted the Blue ball
           more times than their opponent from an equal number
           of attempts. The Blue ball must be potted directly and
           contacting any part of any cushion other than the
           curved faces of the attempted pocket is regarded as a
           non-scoring stroke.

Fouls

     15. Following all fouls, the cue-ball is played from ‘In hand’.
           ‘In hand’ shall mean the cue-ball can be placed anywhere
           on the playing area and the incoming player does not
           have the option of asking their opponent to ‘play again’.
           The shot clock starts when the incoming player receives
           the cue-ball from the referee.

     16. Failure to commence a stroke within the allotted time
           will result in a time foul being awarded. This will incur a
           minimum of five penalty points or the value of the
           ball on, whichever is greater, and the incoming player
           receives the cue-ball from the referee and plays from ‘In
           hand’.

     17. At least one ball must strike a cushion or enter a pocket
           in every stroke. Failure to do so will result in a foul, with
           a minimum of five penalty points or the value of the
           ball on, whichever is greater, awarded to the opponent
           and the incoming player will receive the cue-ball from
           the referee and play from ‘In hand’.

     18. If a player is not in a position to receive the cue-ball from
           the referee following a foul, the referee will place the
           cue-ball on the table and the incoming player’s shot time
           will start. The player may then pick the cue-ball up and
           place it wherever they so wish but the stroke must
           commence within the allotted time.

                                           45
             SNOOKER SHOOTOUT

Other Rules

19. (i)    Section 3 Rules 13 (Play Again) and 14 (Foul and a
           Miss) of the Official Rules of the Game of Snooker
           do not apply.

(ii) Section 3 Rule 12 (Snookered After a Foul) does not
      apply unless a situation arises where, when ‘In hand’,
      it is impossible to hit a ball on.

20. Should an external party distract a player during their
     allotted stroke time the referee will have the option to
     either pause or re-set the shot clock and/or match clock.
     At any point, a referee can call TIME OUT and decide
     whether the shot clock is re-started or re-set.

Etiquette

21. Due to time restraint, the non-striker will not be deemed
     to be breaching etiquette should they remain closer to
     the table than normal, in readiness for their next shot,
     though they should not be positioned in the striker’s line
     of sight.

Referee

22. The referee is the ultimate arbiter and their decision is
     final. Should any eventuality not be covered by these
     Rules the referee's decision will stand and,
     where applicable, it will set a precedent.

             46
             46
47
       RULES OF
    THE GAME OF
ENGLISH BILLIARDS

                   48
49
ENGLISH BILLIARDS RULES INDEX

INDEX                     Page      ENGLISH BILLIARDS         Page

SECTION 1                  51       EQUIPMENT                   52
                           52                                   53
 1 The Standard Table               3 Cue
2 Balls                   54        4 Ancillary                 57
                          54                                    57
SECTION 2                 54        DEFINITIONS                 57
                          54                                    57
 1 Game                   55        13 In-hand                  58
2 Match                   55        14 Ball in Play             58
3 Balls                   55        15 Ball in Baulk
4 Cushion Faces           56        16 Miss                     58
5 Stringing               56        17 Running a Coup           58
6 Striker and Turn        56        18 Infringement and Foul    58
7 Stroke                  56        19 Forced off the Table     59
8 Pot                      57
9 In-off                                  and Pocketing
10 Hazard                 60        20 Spot Occupied
11 Cannon                  61       21 Push Stroke
12 Break                   61       22 Jump Shot
                          62
SECTION 3                           THE GAME
                          62
 1 Description            63        11 Limitation of Hazards  66
2 Start of Game           64
3 Mode of Play            64        12 Ball on Edge of Pocket 67
4 Scoring                 65
5 End of Session and      66        13 Ball Moved by Other

      Game                 72       than Striker              67
6 Playing from In-hand     73
7 Ball on Baulk-line       74       14 Touching Ball          68
8 Baulk-line Crossing      74
9 Spotting Object Balls             15 Fouls                  68
10 Limitation of Cannons   75
                           75       16 Action after a Foul    69
SECTION 4                 76
                                    17 Action after a Miss    70
 1 Unsporting Conduct
2 Time Wasting                      18 Four-handed Billiards  70
3 Penalty
4 Conceding                         19 Use of Ancillary

SECTION 5                           Equipment                 70

 1 The Referee                      20 Interpretation         71
2 The Marker
3 The Stroke Recorder               THE PLAYERS

                                    5 Non-striker             74

                                    6 Scoring Responsibility 74

                                    7 Absence                 74

                                    THE OFFICIALS

                                    4 The Timekeeper          76

                                    5 Assistance by Officials 76

                                50
                  SECTION 1 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

SECTION 1 EQUIPMENT

Measurements displayed in brackets state the metric equivalent to
the nearest millimetre.

1. The Standard Table

     (a) The Playing Area
     The playing area is within the cushion faces and shall
     measure 11 ft 8½ in x 5 ft 10 in (3569 mm x 1778 mm) with a
     tolerance on both dimensions of +/- ½ in (13 mm).

     (b) Height
     The height of the table from the floor to the top of the
     cushion rail shall be 2 ft 10 in (864 mm) with a tolerance of
     +/- ½ in (13 mm).

     (c) Bottom Cushion and Top Cushion
     The two shorter sides of the table are defined as the Bottom
     (also known as Baulk) and Top Cushions of the table. Where a
     cloth with a nap is fitted to the table, the smooth grain of
     the nap runs from the Bottom Cushion to the Top Cushion.

     (d) Baulk-line and Baulk
     A straight line drawn 29 in (737 mm) from the face of the
     Bottom Cushion, and parallel to it, running from side cushion to
     side cushion is called the Baulk-line. That line and the
     intervening space is termed Baulk.

     (e) The “D”
     The “D” is a semi-circle marked in Baulk with the centre of its
     straight section in the middle of the Baulk-line and with a
     radius of 11½ in (292 mm).

                                           51
                  SECTION 1 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

     (f) Spots
     Four spots are marked on the centre longitudinal line of
     the table:

           (i) the Spot, 12 ¾ in (324 mm) from a point
                 perpendicularly below the face of the Top Cushion;

           (ii) the Centre Spot, located midway between the points
                 perpendicularly below the faces of the Top and
                 Bottom Cushions;

           (iii) the Pyramid Spot, located midway between the
                 Centre Spot and a point perpendicularly below the
                 face of the Top Cushion;

           (iv) a spot in the Middle of the Baulk-line.

     (g) Pocket Openings
     There shall be a pocket at each of the four corners of the
     table and one each at the middle of the longer sides.

2. Balls

     (a) A set of balls comprises of a Red, a White and a Yellow
           (which may have spots). Alternatively, a Red, a White and
           a Spot White (with the latter having two or more spots for
           identification) may be used.

     (b) The balls shall be of an approved composition and shall each
           have a diameter of 52.5 mm with a tolerance of +/- 0.05 mm.

     (c) They shall be of equal weight where possible but the
           tolerance between the heaviest ball and the lightest ball in
           a set should be no more than 0.5 g.

     (d) A set of balls may be changed by agreement between the
           players or on a decision by the referee.

3. Cue

A cue shall be not less than 3 ft (914 mm) in length and shall show
no change from the traditional tapered shape and form, with a tip,
used to strike the cue-ball, secured to the thinner end.

                                           52
                  SECTION 1 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS
4. Ancillary
Various cue rests, long cues, extensions and adaptors may be used
by players. These may form part of the equipment normally found at
the table but also include equipment introduced by either a player
or the referee. All extensions, adaptors and other devices to aid
cueing and/or sighting must have received prior approval from the
relevant governing body.

                                           53
                 SECTION 2 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS
Standard definitions used throughout these Rules are italicised.
1. Game
A game is the period of play from the start (see Section 3 Rule
2(b)), each player or side playing in turn until it is completed by:

     (a) concession by any player; or
     (b) reaching the end of a specified period of time; or
     (c) either side reaching the number of points specified; or
     (d) being awarded by the referee under Section 4 Rules 1(b),

           1(d), or 2(c).
2. Match
A match is an agreed or stipulated number of games. A match may
be awarded under Section 4 Rule 1(c), 1(d), or 2(d).
3. Balls

     (a) The White and Yellow (or Spot White in place of Yellow)
           are the allocated balls for the players or sides. The striker’s
           ball is the cue-ball, the other ball then becoming the
           non-striker’s ball.

     (b) The non-striker’s ball and the Red are object balls.

4. Cushion Faces
The cushion rubbers have a flat face which runs along all sides of
the playing area. The curved face of the cushion is considered to
be the area inside the points where the cushion face is actually cut
into a curve to form the pocket opening.

                                           54
                 SECTION 2 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

5. Stringing

Stringing or to String is when both players simultaneously strike a
cue-ball each from opposite halves of the Baulk-line towards the
Top Cushion to rebound back towards Baulk. The player whose
ball finishes nearest to the Bottom Cushion, in the opinion of the
referee, wins the String. The cue-ball may only hit the flat face of
the Top or Bottom Cushions. The following actions will result in the
String being forfeited:

     (a) contact with any cushion other than the Top or Bottom
           Cushion; or

     (b) where the cue-ball crosses to the other player’s half of the
           table.

6. Striker and Turn

The person about to play or in play is the striker. It is their turn until:
     (a) a stroke is played and no points are scored; or
     (b) a foul is committed, all balls have come to rest and the
           referee is satisfied that the striker has left the table.

7. Stroke

     (a) A stroke is made when the striker strikes the cue-ball with
           the tip of the cue in the direction of cue alignment, except
           while addressing the cue-ball (known as feathering).

     (b) The cue-ball must be struck only once and not pushed
           forward. The tip of the cue may momentarily remain in
           contact with the cue-ball after it commences motion.

     (c) A stroke is legal when no foul is committed.
     (d) A stroke is not completed until:

           (i) all balls have come to rest;
           (ii) spotting of any balls required is completed; and
           (iii) any ancillary equipment being used by the striker has

                 been removed, or the referee is satisfied that the
                 stroke is completed.

                                           55
                 SECTION 2 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

     (e) A stroke may be made directly or indirectly, thus:
           (i) a stroke is direct when the cue-ball hits an object ball
                 without first hitting a cushion;
           (ii) a stroke is indirect when the cue-ball hits one or more
                 cushions before hitting either object ball.

8. Pot

A pot is when an object ball, after contact with another ball and
without any infringement, enters a pocket. Causing a ball to be
potted is known as potting.

9. In-off

An in-off is when the cue-ball, after contacting an object ball and
without any infringement, enters a pocket. If both object balls are
contacted by the cue-ball, it is deemed to have gone in-off the first
object ball contacted.

10. Hazard

A hazard is a scoring stroke that does not include a cannon. A
hazard may be:

     (a) a pot, also known as a winning hazard;
     (b) an in-off; also known as a losing hazard;
     (c) two pots;
     (d) a pot and an in-off; or
     (e) two pots and an in-off.

11. Cannon

A cannon is when, without any infringement, the cue-ball makes
contact with both object balls during a stroke. Only one cannon
can be scored in a stroke.

                                           56
                 SECTION 2 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

12. Break

A break is a number of successive scoring strokes made in any
one turn by the striker.

13. In-hand

     (a) The striker’s ball is in-hand:
           (i) before the start of each game;
           (ii) when it has entered a pocket;
           (iii) when it has been forced off the table; or
           (iv) after balls are spotted under Section 3 Rule 14(a) or
                 16(c)(ii).

     (b) It remains in-hand until:
           (i) it is played legally from in-hand; or
           (ii) a foul is committed while it is on the playing area; or
           (iii) it is spotted under Section 3 Rule 11(c) or 16(c)(ii).

     (c) The striker is said to be in-hand when the cue-ball is in-
           hand as above.

14. Ball in Play

     (a) A player’s ball is in play when it is not in-hand.
     (b) The Red is in play when spotted and remains so until it

           enters a pocket or is forced off the table.

15. Ball in Baulk

A ball is in Baulk when it rests centrally on the Baulk-line or
between that line and the Bottom Cushion.

16. Miss

A miss is when, playing from in-hand and without any infringement,
the cue-ball fails to contact an object ball, when there are no object
balls out of Baulk. A miss is not a foul.

                                           57
                 SECTION 2 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

17. Running a Coup

Running a coup is when the striker, while in-hand, plays the cue-
ball directly into a pocket, or directly off the curved face, into a
pocket, when no balls are out of Baulk. It is not deemed running
a coup if the cue-ball first makes contact with a flat face and then
(indirectly) enters a pocket, or if the cue-ball enters a pocket after
hitting the curved face of a different pocket.

18. Infringement and Foul

An infringement is any violation of these Rules. Any infringements
committed by the striker are fouls.

19. Forced Off the Table and Pocketing

A ball is forced off the table if it comes to rest other than on the
playing area or in a pocket, or if it is picked up by the striker while it
is in play. A ball that finishes in a pocket as a result of a non-scoring
stroke is considered pocketed.

20. Spot Occupied

A spot is said to be occupied if a ball cannot be placed on it
without the ball touching another ball.

21. Push Stroke

A push stroke is made when the tip of the cue remains in contact
with the cue-ball:

     (a) after the cue-ball has commenced its motion, other than
           momentarily at the point of initial contact; or

     (b) as the cue-ball contacts an object ball except, where the
           cue-ball and an object ball are almost touching, it shall not
           be deemed a push stroke if the cue-ball hits a very fine
           edge of the object ball.

                                           58
                 SECTION 2 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS
22. Jump Shot
A jump shot is made when the cue-ball passes over any part of an
object ball, whether hitting it in the process or not, except:

     (a) when the cue-ball first hits one object ball and then jumps
           over another ball;

     (b) when the cue-ball jumps and hits an object ball and, at the
           moment of landing on the playing area, the cue-ball is not
           on the far side of the current position of that object ball; or

     (c) when, after hitting an object ball legally, the cue-ball jumps
           over that ball after hitting a cushion or the other ball.

                                           59
                 SECTION 3 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

SECTION 3 THE GAME

1. Description

English Billiards may be played by two players independently, or
by more than two players as sides. The Game is summarised in
paragraphs (a) to (g) below.

     (a) Three balls are used: a plain White by one player or side, a
           Yellow (or Spot White) by the other player or side, and a
           Red.

     (b) Scoring strokes in a player’s turn are made by pots, in-offs
           and cannons, singly or in combination.

     (c) Points awarded for scoring strokes are added to the score
           of the striker.

     (d) Penalty points from fouls and misses are added to the
           opponent’s score.

     (e) A tactic employed at any time during a game is to leave
           both object balls in Baulk when the next player is in-hand
           such that any attempt at contacting the balls must be by
           means of an indirect stroke.

     (f) The winner of a game is the player or side:
           (i) who has scored most points in the agreed or
                 stipulated time; or
           (ii) who first reaches the agreed or stipulated number of
                 points; or
           (iii) to whom the game is awarded under Section 4 Rule
                 1(b), 1(d), or 2(c); or
           (iv) to whom the game is conceded.

     (g) The winner of a match is the player or side winning most
           games or, where aggregate points are relevant, with the
           greatest total, or, to whom the match is awarded under
           Section 4 Rule 1(c), 1(d), or 2(d).

                                           60
                 SECTION 3 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

2. Start of Game

The allocation of the White ball and Yellow ball (or Spot White) to
a player or side, and which side is to play first, shall be decided by
Stringing or any mutually agreed manner, the winner having both
options unless all players mutually agree on these options.

     (a) The order of play thus determined must remain unaltered
           throughout the game.

     (b) The Red is placed on the Spot and the first player plays
           from in-hand, the game starting when the cue-ball has
           been placed on the playing area and contacted with the
           tip of the cue, either:
           (i) as a stroke is made; or
           (ii) while preparing to play a stroke, except as in Section 3
                 Rule 6(b).

     (c) It is the striker’s responsibility to play with the correct cue-
           ball even if the wrong ball is passed to them by the referee.

     (d) In matches which consist of a multiple number of games, if
           a game is started by the wrong player or side:
           (i) it shall be re-started correctly, without penalty, if only
                 one stroke has been played and no foul has been
                 committed since; or
           (ii) it shall continue in the normal way if another stroke
                 is made, or if a foul is committed during the first
                 stroke or after the completion of the first stroke, with
                 the correct order of starting being resumed in the
                 following game such that one player or side will have
                 started in three consecutive games.

3. Mode of Play

     (a) The players play alternately, or in turn, unless a scoring
           stroke is made, in which case the striker continues the
           break playing from the position left or, after an in-off or if
           touching another ball as provided for in Section 3 Rule
           14(a), from in-hand.

                                           61
                 SECTION 3 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

     (b) When the striker fails to score, their turn ends and the next
           player plays from the position then left, this being from in-
           hand if their cue-ball is off the table or touching another
           ball as provided for in Section 3 Rule 14(a).

     (c) After a foul, the next player has the additional option of
           playing from in-hand with both object balls spotted as
           provided for in Section 3 Rule 16(c)(ii).

     (d) Following the final stroke of the opponent’s turn, or
           following a foul, if an incoming player strikes the cue-ball
           or commits a foul before the balls have come to rest, or
           before the referee has completed the spotting of any ball,
           they shall be penalised as if they were the striker and their
           turn will end.

4. Scoring

Points are scored as indicated in paragraphs (a) to (d) below.
     (a) A cannon, pot White, pot Yellow, in-off White and in-off
           Yellow shall each score two points.
     (b) A pot Red and an in-off Red shall each score three points.
     (c) If more than one hazard or a combination of hazards and
           cannon are made in the same stroke, all are scored.
     (d) When an in-off is combined with a cannon, the in-off shall
           score (additionally to the cannon):
           (i) three points if the Red was hit first by the cue-ball;
           (ii) two points if the opponent’s cue-ball was hit first; or
           (iii) two points if both object balls were hit simultaneously.

5. End of Session and Game

     (a) At the end of the period of time set for any session, the
           referee shall call TIME. Any stroke that has been made shall
           be allowed to finish and any points scored shall be added
           to the appropriate side. If other sessions are to follow, the
           position of all balls shall be measured and noted by the
           referee so that the next session may commence from the
           point of interruption.

                                           62
                 SECTION 3 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

     (b) The end of the final session as above is the end of a game
           in a timed format.

     (c) In a game or match played to a time limit, it is possible that
           the scores could be level at the end of the period of time
           allowed and the Rules setting the period of time should
           include provision for any necessary tie-break.

     (d) When playing to an agreed or stipulated number of points,
           the end of the game is reached when a player first reaches
           or passes the required number. Only the points required
           are counted, though the player shall be credited with a
           break that includes all points scored.

6. Playing from In-hand

To play from in-hand, the cue-ball must be struck from a position
on or within the lines of the “D”, and:

     (a) the referee will state, if asked, whether the cue-ball is
           properly placed (that is, not outside the lines of the “D”);

     (b) if the tip of the cue should contact the cue-ball while
           positioning it, and the referee is satisfied that the striker
           was not preparing or attempting to play a stroke, then the
           cue-ball is not in play;

     (c) the cue-ball must be played out of Baulk. If it contacts an
           object ball that is out of Baulk, the cue-ball is deemed to
           have been played out of Baulk even though it may not
           physically cross the Baulk-line;

     (d) the cue-ball must contact a cushion or ball out of Baulk
           before re-entering and coming to rest in Baulk, or before
           contacting a ball in Baulk;

     (e) the cue-ball may be played against a cushion in Baulk
           before hitting a ball out of Baulk;

     (f) if an object ball is in Baulk, no part of its surface may be
           played on directly from in-hand, even if that part of its
           surface is physically out of Baulk.

                                           63
                 SECTION 3 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

7. Ball on Baulk-line

The referee shall state, if asked at any time, whether a ball on or
near the Baulk-line is in Baulk or out.

8. Baulk-line Crossing

In any event where the Baulk-line Crossing Rule is applied, the cue-
ball must cross the Baulk-line as part of a legal stroke between 80
- 100 points in every accumulation of 100 points within a break.

     (a) Crossing the Baulk-line must be made into Baulk, i.e.
           against the smooth grain of the nap of the cloth.

     (b) The cue-ball is in Baulk when it crosses the Baulk-line
           (resting centrally on the Baulk-line means that it has not
           crossed). The cue-ball does not have to return out of the
           Baulk.

     (c) The referee must call BAULK-LINE WARNING AT 80 after
           completion of the stroke that took the striker’s break score
           to, or past, 80 points.

     (d) The Baulk-line crossing must be made when the break
           score is within the 20 points tolerance, that is 80 to 100
           points, and made during, or prior to, the stroke that takes
           the break score to, or past, 100 points.

     (e) If the referee fails to state the Baulk-line Warning at the
           correct point of the break score, the cue-ball must cross
           the Baulk-line within 20 points of the break score at which
           the Warning is announced. The break score at which the
           next Warning is due in the break is unaffected.

     (f) When the referee is satisfied that the cue-ball has crossed
           the Baulk-line legally, they shall call the break score and
           shall then call BAULK-LINE CROSSED.

     (g) If the striker is playing from in-hand or from within Baulk, it
           is possible to make a Baulk-line crossing providing the
           referee is satisfied that the stroke causes the cue-ball,
           either fully or the greater part of it, to leave Baulk before
           returning to cross the Baulk-line.

                                           64
                 SECTION 3 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

     (h) Unless the striker’s turn ends with a non-scoring stroke, the
           failure of their cue-ball to cross the Baulk-line during the
           period of 80 - 100 points, as described above, is a foul and
           the incoming player will have the usual options following
           a foul.

9. Spotting Object Balls

     (a) If the Red is potted, pocketed or forced off the table, it is
           placed on the Spot, or:
           (i) if the Spot is occupied, it shall be placed on the
                 Pyramid Spot;
           (ii) if both the Spot and the Pyramid Spot are occupied, it
                 shall be placed on the Centre Spot.

     (b) If the Red is potted twice, or more by mistake, in
           consecutive strokes in one break, either from the Spot, or
           the Pyramid Spot, not in conjunction with another score, it
           shall be placed on the Centre Spot, except:
           (i) if the Centre Spot is occupied, it shall be placed on the
                 Pyramid Spot;
           (ii) if both the Centre Spot and the Pyramid Spot are
                 occupied, it shall again be placed on the Spot but shall
                 not then be considered as part of a sequence of pots
                 from the Spot for the purpose of this Rule.

     (c) For continued pots of the Red, not in conjunction with
           another score, it shall be placed on the Spot twice, then
           the Centre Spot once, in sequence while those spots are
           not occupied.

     (d) The referee shall inform the striker upon request how many
           consecutive pots have been made off the same spot.

     (e) The opponent’s cue-ball will be spotted in accordance with
           Section 3 Rule 11(c), 14(a), or 16(c)(ii) if appropriate.

     (f) A ball, to be correctly spotted, must be placed on the spot
           designated in these Rules.

                                           65
                 SECTION 3 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

     (g) If a ball, initially correctly spotted, should be contacted,
           then that ball is no longer considered to be spotted even
           though it may not have moved.

     (h) A player shall not be held responsible for any mistake by
           the referee in failing to spot any ball correctly.

10. Limitation of Cannons

Consecutive cannons, not in conjunction with a hazard, are limited
to seventy-five.

     (a) After seventy such cannons, the referee shall call SEVENTY
           CANNONS. If the referee should fail to announce when
           seventy cannons have been made, the striker shall be
           entitled to make five more such cannons after the referee
           does call SEVENTY CANNONS.

     (b) The referee shall inform the striker upon request how many
           consecutive strokes of cannons have been made.

11. Limitation of Hazards

Consecutive hazards, not in conjunction with a cannon, are limited
to fifteen strokes.

     (a) After ten such strokes of hazards, the referee shall call TEN
           HAZARDS. If the referee should fail to announce when ten
           hazards have been made, the striker shall be entitled to
           make five more such hazards after the referee does
           call TEN HAZARDS.

     (b) The referee shall inform the striker upon request how
           many consecutive strokes of hazards have been made.

     (c) If the non-striker’s ball is off the table as a result of the
           final stroke of the non-striker’s last turn, it shall after the
           fifteenth hazard, be placed on the spot in the Middle of the
           Baulk-line or, if that spot is occupied, on the right-hand
           corner of the “D”, viewed from the Baulk end of the table.

                                           66
                 SECTION 3 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

12. Ball on Edge of Pocket

When a ball falls into a pocket without being hit by another ball,
and:

     (a) being no part of any stroke in progress, it shall be replaced
           and any points scored shall count.

     (b) If it would have been hit by any ball involved in a stroke:
           (i) with no infringement (including cases where an
                 infringement would have occurred but for the ball
                 falling into a pocket), all balls will be replaced and the
                 same stroke played again, or a different stroke may
                 be played by the same striker at their discretion;
           (ii) if a foul is committed, all balls will be replaced and the
                 next player has the usual options after a foul.

     (c) If a ball balances momentarily on the edge of a pocket and
           then falls in, it shall be considered potted, pocketed or in-
           off and shall not be replaced.

13. Ball Moved by Other than Striker

If a ball, stationary or moving, is disturbed other than by the striker,
it shall be replaced by the referee to the position they deem the
ball was, or would have come to rest, without penalising the striker.

     (a) This Rule shall include cases where another occurrence or
           person, other than the striker’s partner, causes the striker
           to move a ball, but will not apply in cases where a ball
           moves due to any defect in the table surface, except in the
           case where a spotted ball moves before the next stroke
           has been made.

     (b) No player shall be penalised for any disturbance of balls by
           the referee.

                                           67
                 SECTION 3 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

14. Touching Ball

     (a) When the striker’s cue-ball remains touching another ball,
           the referee shall call TOUCHING BALL and, after briefly
           allowing both players or sides to inspect, the Red shall be
           placed on the Spot, the non-striker’s ball, if on the table,
           shall be placed on the Centre Spot, and the striker shall
           play from in-hand.

     (b) If a stationary object ball, not touching the cue-ball when
           examined by the referee, is later seen to be in contact with
           the cue-ball before a stroke has been made, the balls shall
           be re-positioned by the referee to their satisfaction.

     (c) The striker is entitled to be told upon request whether the
           object balls are touching.

15. Fouls

The following acts are fouls:
     (a) striking a ball other than the cue-ball;
     (b) striking the cue-ball more than once during a stroke;
     (c) striking when any ball is not at rest;
     (d) striking when both feet are off the floor;
     (e) playing out of turn;
     (f) playing improperly from in-hand, including at the
           opening stroke;
     (g) running a coup;
     (h) playing a jump shot;
     (i) making a push stroke;
     (j) causing a ball to be forced off the table;
     (k) making more than fifteen consecutive hazards;
     (l) making more than seventy-five consecutive cannons;
     (m) contacting, with any part of the player’s person,
           attire or equipment, a ball in play, or any device used to
           mark a ball in play;
     (n) striking before the referee has completed the spotting of
           a ball;

                                           68
                 SECTION 3 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

     (o) causing the cue-ball to fail to contact any object ball,
           other than as provided for in Section 2 Rule 16;

     (p) conferring with a partner contrary to Section 3 Rule
           18(b);

     (q) playing with a non-standard cue;
     (r) using a ball off the table for any purpose;
     (s) using any object to measure gaps or distance;
     (t) failure to cross the Baulk-line during the stipulated

           period.

16. Action after a Foul

If a foul is committed, the referee shall immediately call FOUL.
     (a) If the striker has not made a stroke, their right to play a
           stroke ends immediately. If they should, in the opinion of
           the referee, intentionally play a stroke after being called
           for a foul, they shall be deemed to have committed a
           further foul for playing out of turn and shall be further
           penalised.
     (b) All points scored in a break before a foul is awarded shall
           count but the striker shall not score any points in a stroke
           called foul.
     (c) All fouls will incur a penalty of two points but not more
           than two penalty points shall be incurred in any one
           stroke. Additionally, the next player shall have the option
           of playing:
           (i) from where the balls have come to rest, the Red if off
                 the table being first correctly spotted; or
           (ii) from in-hand with the Red placed on the Spot and the
                 opponent’s cue-ball placed on the Centre Spot. After a
                 request to have the balls spotted has been made, it
                 cannot be withdrawn.
     (d) If the foul is neither awarded by the referee, nor
           successfully claimed by the non-striker before the next
           stroke is made, it is condoned.

                                           69
                 SECTION 3 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

17. Action after a Miss

If a miss is played, without running a coup, the referee shall call
MISS. A penalty of two points is incurred, which is added to the
opponent’s score. The next player shall play their stroke from
where the balls have come to rest.

18. Four-handed Billiards

     (a) The side to play the opening stroke is decided as in
           Section 3 Rule 2. The order of play is then determined
           by the next player after which the order must remain
           unchanged throughout the game.

     (b) Partners may confer during a game but not while one is
           the striker and has approached the table until the break
           has ended with a non-scoring stroke or foul. This principle
           shall also apply in games between individual players that
           form part of a team match.

19. Use of Ancillary Equipment

It is the responsibility of the striker to both place and remove any
equipment they may use at the table.

     (a) The striker is responsible for all items including, but not
           limited to, rests and extensions that they bring to the table,
           whether owned by them or borrowed (except from the
           referee), and they will be penalised for any fouls made
           when using this equipment.

     (b) Equipment normally found at the table which has been
           provided by another party including the referee is not the
           responsibility of the striker. It is not a foul if this equipment
           should prove to be faulty and thereby cause the striker to
           contact a ball or balls. The referee will, if necessary,
           reposition any balls in accordance with Section 3 Rule 13
           and the striker, if in a break, will be allowed to continue
           without penalty.

                                           70
                 SECTION 3 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS
20. Interpretation

     (a) Circumstances may necessitate adjustment in how Rules
           are applied for persons with disabilities. In particular
           Section 3 Rule 15(d) cannot be applied to players in
           wheelchairs.

     (b) When there is no referee, the opposing player or side will
           be regarded as such for the purpose of these Rules.

                                           71
                 SECTION 4 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

SECTION 4 THE PLAYERS

1. Unsporting Conduct

     (a) In the event of:
           (i) a player using offensive language, or making offensive
                 gestures; or
           (ii) any conduct by a player which in the opinion of the
                 referee is wilfully or persistently Unsporting; or
           (iii) any other conduct by a player which otherwise
                 amounts to Unsporting Conduct; or
           (iv) any player refusing to continue the current game;
           the referee shall Warn the player that in the event of any
           further Unsporting Conduct the game will be awarded
           to their opponent.

     (b) If the referee has Warned the player under (a) above, in the
           event of any further Unsporting Conduct by that player:
           (i) the referee shall award the game to their opponent; or
           (ii) if the match is an agreed number of games, the
                 referee shall award the game to their opponent and
                 Warn the player that in the event of any further
                 Unsporting Conduct the match will be awarded to
                 their opponent. If it happens between games, the
                 referee shall award the next game to their opponent.

     (c) If a referee has awarded a game to a player’s opponent
           under (b) above or (d) below, which did not involve the
           ending of the match, then in the event of any further
           Unsporting Conduct by the player concerned, the referee
           shall award the match to the player’s opponent.

     (d) In the event that the conduct, in the opinion of the referee
           is sufficiently serious, the referee shall award the game
           or the match to the player’s opponent, even if previous
           Warnings for Unsporting Conduct were not issued.

     (e) Any decision by the referee to award a game or match to a
           player’s opponent shall be final and shall not be subject to
           any appeal.

                                           72
                 SECTION 4 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

2. Time Wasting

If the referee considers a player is running down the clock, they
may also consider it as Time Wasting and initiate the procedure as
indicated in paragraphs (a) to (d) below.

     (a) In the event of a player taking an abnormal amount of time
           over a stroke, or the selection of a stroke, or in the event
           that the non-striker’s actions are deemed Time Wasting,
           the referee shall pause the clock, where relevant, and then
           Warn the offender that in the event of any further Time
           Wasting, the game will be awarded to their opponent. If
           relevant, the clock shall be re-started after the next stroke
           is played or a foul is awarded.

     (b) If there is a game clock relevant to a multi-table set-up and
           not for an individual table, the referee may decide to add
           to the end of the game any wasted time where the clock
           could not be paused. Once the referee has dealt with Time
           Wasting as in paragraph (a) above, they will announce the
           amount of time to be added, and if requested later in the
           game they will remind the players of this amount of time.

     (c) If the referee has Warned the player for Time Wasting
           under paragraph (a) above, in the event of any further
           Time Wasting by that player, the referee shall award the
           game to their opponent. If the individual match is an
           agreed number of games the referee shall Warn the player
           that, in the event of any further Time Wasting, the match
           will be awarded to their opponent.

     (d) If a referee has awarded a game to a player’s opponent for
           Time Wasting which did not end the match, in the event
           of any further Time Wasting by the player concerned, the
           referee shall award the match to their opponent.

                                           73
                 SECTION 4 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

3. Penalty

When a game or match is forfeited under Section 4 Rule 1(b), 1(d),
or 2(c):

     (a) if it was to be decided on an agreed or stipulated number
           of points, the offender shall forfeit all points scored and the
           non-offender shall win each relevant game by the agreed
           or stipulated number of points to nil; or

     (b) if it was over an agreed or stipulated period of time and
           is an individual match, the match shall be forfeited. If the
           match is an agreed number of games, the game is initially
           forfeited.

4. Conceding

A player may offer a concession, but this becomes null and void if
the opponent chooses to play on.

5. Non-striker

The non-striker shall, when the striker is playing, avoid standing
or moving in the line of sight of the striker. They shall sit or stand
at a reasonable distance from the table and avoid making any
movement or action that may interrupt the concentration of the
striker.

6. Scoring Responsibility

As well as the referee, it is the players’ responsibility to make
sure that the correct score is being applied, either on the
scoreboard or by the referee announcing the scores. If any
player notices that the score is incorrect, it is their responsibility
to inform the referee at the earliest opportunity.

7. Absence

In the case of their absence from the table, the non-striker
may appoint a deputy to watch in their interest and claim an
infringement if necessary. Such appointment must be made
known to the referee prior to departure.

                                           74
                 SECTION 5 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

SECTION 5 THE OFFICIALS

1. The Referee

     (a) The referee shall:
           (i) make decisions in the interests of fair play for
                 any situation not covered adequately by these Rules;
           (ii) make decisions regarding pausing or stopping the
                 clock where relevant, and inform a player of the time
                 remaining upon reasonable request;
           (iii) be responsible for proper conduct during a match
                 under these Rules;
           (iv) intervene if they see any infringement;
           (v) tell a player the position of a ball if requested; and
           (vi) clean any ball upon reasonable request by the striker.

     (b) The referee shall not:
           (i) answer any question not authorised in these Rules; nor
           (ii) give any indication that a player is about to make an
                 infringement; nor
           (iii) give any advice or opinion on situations that could
                 affect play; nor
           (iv) answer any question regarding the difference in
                 scores.

     (c) If the referee has failed to notice any incident, they may at
           their discretion take the evidence of the marker or other
           officials or spectators best placed for the observation or, if
           available, they may view a camera/video recording of
           the incident to assist their decision.

2. The Marker

The marker shall keep the score on the scoreboard and assist the
referee in carrying out their duties. The marker shall also act as a
stroke recorder if necessary.

                                           75
                 SECTION 5 • ENGLISH BILLIARDS

3. The Stroke Recorder
The stroke recorder shall maintain a record of each stroke or
infringement and how many points are scored by each player or
side as required. They shall also make a note of break totals and
Warnings where issued.
4. The Timekeeper
Where times are relevant to a game or match the timekeeper will
be responsible for;

     (a) starting and stopping the match clock; and
     (b) pausing the match clock at the request of the referee; and
     (c) indicating that the specified time has been reached. If not

           adopted by the referee, the role of timekeeper is generally
           assumed by the marker or the stroke recorder.
5. Assistance by Officials
     (a) At the striker’s request, the referee or marker shall move
           and hold in position any lighting apparatus that interferes
           with the action of the striker in making a stroke.
     (b) It is permissible for the referee or marker to give necessary
           assistance to players with disabilities according to their
           circumstances.

                                           76
NOTES
   77
NOTES
   78
NOTES
   79
NOTES
   80
The Sports of Snooker and English Billiards are to be contested
    with the highest standards of sportsmanship and integrity.

These official rules are published alongside our vision to provide
 equal opportunities for all. On behalf of the WPBSA board and
management, I would like to thank those who have contributed

                             to this latest publication.

Jason Ferguson, Chairman of the WPBSA

WPBSA Rules and Technical Committee 2022:

Jan Verhaas - Chairman        Derek Budde
     Brendan Moore          Colin Humphries
         Paul Collier
     Jason Ferguson             Joe Perry
                               Martin Clark

With consultation and thanks to:

   Paul Bannister              Marcel Eckardt
       Lisa Bray               Thorsten Mūller
                                Ingo Schmidt
     Clive Brown
Desislava Bozhilova              Rob Spencer
                            Glen Sullivan-Bissett
 Jason Colebrook
    Paul Cosgriff              Mark P. Thomas
   Chris Coumbe             Proletina Velichkova
     Alex Crisan

                        81
               OFFICIAL RULES

                        OF THE GAMES OF

SNOOKER AND ENGLISH BILLIARDS
